If you've never used text animators in
After Effects before because they
scramble your brain, get ready to
embrace them. Today, we're going to
create procedural kinetic type using,
yes, text animators. Then we'll look at
how you can add shape layers and footage
and a sound bed of audio clips to create
a loop and collage animation.
Hi, I'm Anna Bennett. You may know me
online as the video shop. What? I'm a
motion designer and After Effects
teacher. Film is my life and so is
imposter syndrome. I thought it might be
fun to combine all those things. Do you
see anybody having fun here? So, I'm
thrilled to be here at School of Motion
talking about this with you. And if you
want to follow along, be sure to
download the free working files from the
link below. Okay, let's get started.
Before we proceed, I need to give a
shout out to one Lugo. He kindly let me
base my design on his style of
illustration. His work is sublime, so do
check it out. I usually find it's easier
to get your head around text animators
by looking at something like this, with
the letters animated on the Y-axis
rather than the X. But if you're already
familiar with them, feel free to skip to
the next chapter. This will be a super
quick crash course.
So to add a text animator, we just
untoggle our layer here. And you'll see
that you've got animate and this play
icon. If for any reason you can't see
that, it could be that you've got all of
your panels hidden. So you can turn your
panels on and off with these icons at
the bottom left here. If they're all
off, then you won't see that. So just
make sure that at least one of them is
on. Then we'll click on the play icon
and then go up to position. So what that
does is it gives us an animator and a
range selector for that animator. And
then we've got our position value here.
So if we set that to be 400 on the Y,
it's going to drop our letters down. And
then if we go into our range selector.
So if you're wondering what a range
selector is, it's the range of the text
that we're going to be animating. We can
adjust that range here with the start
and end values. And we can also just
grab the icons in the comp window here
and do it that way. So I'm going to
leave those values at n and 100 and then
go into advanced. We'll change the shape
from square to ramp up. We'll look at
the other shapes later. We can animate
the offset. So at the moment we've got
it at zero. If we set that to be minus
100 and then set a key frame. We'll go
to frame 20. Then set that to be 100.
And then just set the end of our work
area. Have a look at that. So obviously
that's linear, very basic. We can ease
in here with these percentage values. So
if we just go into the middle here and
then if we bump the ease high up to 100.
So that's ease in out. We preview that.
So the letters are snapping into place.
And then if we bump the ease low up to
100, then we've got this animation. So,
we'll explore these other options more
throughout the lesson. But hopefully, if
you're new to Text Animators, you're
starting to see the potential. And the
good thing is they kind of work like
shape layers. So, we've now got a group
here that we can sort of turn on or off.
And you may have multiple groups in one
text layer. Congratulations, you've
graduated from the School of Motion Text
Animators Crash course. Drive carefully,
folks. Now, we'll create this looping
kinetic type. We'll animate the type
with text animators, then add them to
paths. Finally, we'll make them 3D
layers and add these accents. I've got a
1920 x 1080 comp 24 frames a second. I'm
using film clips, so that's a good frame
rate to work to, and a duration of 10
seconds, and just going to change the
background
color.
Add a text layer.
And going to change the type face. And
actually only just found out working on
this video that you can favorite type
faces. So that's handy. We're going to
use Nazar exuberant regular. It's
available on the Adobe Fonts website.
And if tight faces were people, I think
it would be this guy. I just love the
name. So let's change this to an off
black. Going to change the justification
to left and the size to 100. I'm going
to add a text animator to the position.
So, minus 2,000
on the X. Go into advanced to set that
to be ramp down. So, drag the offset
over to 100. Set a key frame. Going to
change this to frames by
control-clicking here. And then go over
to frame 30.
And then set that to be minus 100.
And then set the ease low to be 100.
So, I'm going to rename this animator to
be on. So, it's just good housekeeping
and you may have more than one folder on
a text layer. I say folder, probably
group is more accurate, but you know
what I mean. So, we've got our letters
animating on. To have them animate off,
we can just duplicate this folder. And
we'll rename this off. So, rather than
do everything from scratch, going to
turn this one off. That's confusing, I
know. So, we want them to animate off to
the right. So, I'm going to change the
position to be 2,00 and then go in and
change the shape to be ramp up and then
offset these key frames.
So, if we turn this one on, so we've got
them animating on and then animating
off. So, I want some subtle continuous
motion on the letters. What I'm going to
do is add a tracking property.
call this tracking.
So here I'm not going to go into the
range selector. I'm just going to key
frame the tracking from zero to 30 over
the same duration.
So this is what that looks like. So I
want these letters to just come in a
little bit sooner. We can still easy
ease these key frames now. So, if I
press U, I'm going to easy ease these
two sets and then go into the graph
editor and then just
pull that in a bit. By the way, if
you're not seeing this shape line and
instead you've got something like this,
you can change the graph type here and
it could be that you're looking at the
speed graph. So, you can change it to
the value graph here. And then this
graph is the inverse of the other one.
So what this means is the steeper the
graph is, the faster the movement and
the letters are coming in quickly and
then slowing down. So now if we overlap
these key frames, there'll be very
subtle movement on the letters even when
they're fully animated into place. So
we've got key frames at 0, 20, 40, and
60 frames.
And then lastly, just going to add a
little bit of shift on the X position.
So add a
another position animator. I'm going to
call this shift. And then just like the
tracking, not going to go into the range
selector. Just going to set that to be
minus 100.
And then at 60,
set that to be 100. And then just
preview that.
And the reason for doing it here with
the text animator rather than just with
like normal position key frames P for
position is we can still move this text
layer around and it's not creating any
row key frames for us. So if we have
this sort of you know pretty much
centered on screen and then the final
animation looks like this.
So that's our first word done. So the
second one we want to animate in the
other direction. So, I'm just going to
duplicate this.
Move the duplicate down.
Change it to right justified.
And then we go into the text animators
and swap the on and the off and rename
them.
Then press U for the key frames.
Change them to linear. So, controlclick
on them.
And then going to swap them over.
And finally select all the key frames
apart from the tracking
and right click
key frame assistant time reverse key
frames. So now that's animating on from
the right. And then we just need to easy
ease these as before. If like me you've
got Flow or a similar plugin, you can
copy the curves of these key frames and
apply them to these. But if you don't,
it only takes a second to go in and do
it manually.
They don't need to be exact. The the
whole animation is quite a loosey goosey
approach anyway. So, I'm just going to
preview that.
So, that looks okay. Let's just get the
rest of our text in now. So, I'm going
to move these up and then just duplicate
them.
So, this is where I really wish I'd
started with this part of the animation,
which more accurately represents my
state of mind 95% of the time. So, next
we're going to put our type on a path.
Just make it look a bit more kooky. So,
I'm going to solo the effortless and
then grab our pen tool. Just zoom out
and just draw a simple path. and can
either uncolapse down, find the path
options,
drop it onto there,
then just bump the first margin across a
bit so it's centered. We can tweak this
later.
Or what you can do is I'm going to give
this one a different
path
because there's no shortcut. You can
always type in path and then just drop
this down here. And then here just um
bump up the
or down the last margin and move that
down.
So now I want to make these all 3D
layers and then get a camera in.
And the camera I'm using is a 15 mil. 15
mm is considered an ultra wideangle
lens. You'll have seen films with this
effect, especially if you're a terrible
Gillian fan. The result will be limited
with flat 3D layers like this, but it
will still make for a potentially more
interesting look for your scene. If you
haven't considered using different lens
settings for cameras in After Effects
before, or what they do, you might want
to play around or do a bit of research.
This video from Studio Binda, for
example, is a good place to start. We'll
look at lens distortion more later when
we bring our animation together, but for
now, I'll okay this. As for placing your
text and having it move along the paths,
just move the text around, rotate it,
bring it closer to the camera, or move
it further away. See what works for you.
And you'll likely want to tweak things
depending on what footage you choose to
bring in. Anyway, I'm actually looking
forward to seeing what you create with
these techniques because it likely won't
look the same as mine. So, please do
comment below if you've got something to
show or hit me up on my channel. No, as
I mentioned before, the wide-angle lens
will distort layers as you bring them
close to the camera. One thing I
experimented with early on in the
process was using a very shallow depth
of field on the camera. I ultimately
ditched it, but it gave the scene a
slightly woozy feeling. I've included
this setup in the project file if you
want to take a look. Speaking of which,
if you want to follow along exactly, I
definitely recommend downloading the
project file if you haven't already.
Saying that, here are the settings I
ended up with for these two layers. And
now we're going to do the other two. And
just going to give this one a slightly
different
mask path. I'll spade the scintillate
inside of me creating another mask path.
And we'll just skip ahead. And we'll set
the text on that mask path as before.
And just bump up the first margin.
And then I'm going to just copy that
onto
this one. We'll skip ahead again. And
I've just adjusted the mask path and
moved the text along it. And these are
the values that I ended up with. So now
if we preview that.
So the effortless text here hasn't
animated off completely, but that
doesn't matter because I'm going to
cover it up with footage clips anyway.
Next, I'm going to offset these layers a
little bit.
[Music]
Let's preview that again.
That's just enough time to read the
text, but this is going to be a looping
animation. So, the idea is that people
are going to watch it hopefully more
than once or twice. So, this is what
your text can look like with just simple
text animators and type on a path. But,
I'd also encourage you to go into the
effects and just try out some of these
distortion effects. When I was working
on my animation, I tried a handful with
no particular results in mind. I just
wanted to see if anything interesting
came with them. This is a sample of just
a handful and I particularly love the
liquify effect. I think it's
underappreciated, but there's obviously
a lot more you can play and experiment
with. So in this comp here, what I've
done is I've added CC split
and twirl to some of the layers. And
what I've done is I've pre-mped a couple
of these text layers and then just added
a corner pin effect just to amplify the
distortion a little bit. And then this
layer here.
This is what it looks like
without. And then I've just added a CC
split
just to make it a little bit more goofy.
Even if it doesn't work out, I'll often
bookmark an effect or animation and
might revisit it for a future project or
just take time to play around with
different effects and keep an After
Effects project full of weird
experiments. My experiments did not turn
out quite like yours. So, next we're
going to add these graphical accents to
the type. And because we're using text
animators, they're procedural, so this
is really quick to do. So, I'm going to
grab the effortless type, duplicate, and
solo that. Then change this to a tight
face that supports
triangles and maybe other shapes. And
I'm on a PC, so if I've got number lock
on, and then if I press Alt and 31 on
the number keypad, gives me a triangle.
Then I'm going to select that. Copy,
paste. One, two, three, five.
So we've got 20 of those.
So, I want them to face to the right.
So, I'm going to go in and add a
rotation
and put that at the top.
Then set that to be minus 90.
So, you don't always have to animate
with text animators. So, I'm going to
set the
font size to 30. And
I just turn on the text. and maybe
increase the baseline shift to
130. And I wouldn't normally mess with
these for type, but um we can increase
these just to um change their appearance
a bit
and also the kerning.
So let's see what that looks like.
So the idea is that it's just sort of
subtly bringing on the text. So, I'm
going to change the color to white. And
maybe even press UU can adjust the first
margin value. And maybe they're a bit
too prominent up here. So, we can add
another
animator,
which we're not animating, but just to
reduce it. Going to set that to ramp up.
Now that's done. You can copy and paste
those triangles and do something similar
for the creative text. And then I've
used full stops to accent the master
text. And that gives us this.
Now we'll create this wow text for this
footage clip I'm using. We'll use a text
animator on the X position of the type
as before, but also add a scale animator
to bunch the letters up like this.
Finally, we'll tweak the animator
settings so the letters are pushed out
and along. What we've got here is a comp
with exactly the same settings as our
master comp with the footage clip that
I've rotoscoped and we're just bringing
this in as a reference for the position
of the text. So, we're going to move
this over to the bottom left. Going to
add a text layer. Type wow 456.
and just change this type face to cheap
pine. But any similar type face will do
100.
Let's reset these values. So again, as
we did before, add a path and align the
text to it. Just make sure it's left
justified. And then just set the first
margin
so that it's here. So, I'm going to
animate the first margin
over 40 frames.
Then, to have the letters come on, I'm
going to add the typewriter animate in
effect. And these text presets use text
animators under the hood anyway. So,
this is just animating the opacity. So,
we've it gives us key frames. I'm just
going to set that to be over 15 frames
just so that the letters appear one by
one as they push out from the left.
Just for housekeeping,
call that type on. And just to get the
effect of these letters kind of being
pushed out of the mouth. That sounds
weird. Going to make sure that this
isn't selected otherwise it'll add it to
this typon. So add a position. So got a
new animator and call this push out and
set that to be minus
250.
And then ramp
down.
So offset from 100. put that key frame
at the start
and then at 30
minus 100.
And then just to give that a bit more
oomph, going to easy those.
Set the
ease low to be 100.
So next going to add a scale animator.
Rename this.
Set that to be 200.
And this going to set that to be round.
And then ease high minus 50.
Ease low 25. and then offset that from
minus 100
at frame zero and then at 35.
Look at that.
And then this we're going to easy ease
again.
Give it that shape. Let's have a look at
that.
Then to have the letters traveling along
this path that we've set, add another
position animator, and call this one
off.
Set this to be 4,000 on the X.
Set this to be ramp up
offset of 100.
And then over here, frame 40
minus 100. Set the ease low to be 100.
Just have a look at that.
Again, just to tweak the timing a little
bit.
Going to
give it something like this. Just so it
lingers a little bit.
And that gives us this. Wow.
Wow. As I mentioned before, with text
animators, we can easily move and scale
our layers without having to worry about
row key frames. We'll look at pulling
this collage look together shortly, but
for my footage clips, I use this dot
half te pattern as an overlay. It's a
fudge, but the footage is so small in
the composition, the viewer really won't
notice the difference. You can build
effects or use plugins which give you a
proper half te effect. Anyway, with that
applied, the end result looks like this.
Now, we'll create this text, but we can
reuse some of the animators we've
already made. For this, we'll have the
letters being pushed out to the left.
And we'll also add a wiggly selector to
give us this erratic random effect on
the scale and rotation. We'll start by
duplicating our wow comp. And we'll call
this one
and get rid of all the text animators.
So, the good thing about text animators
is you can copy them from one layer to
another and you can even save them as
presets if you particularly like
something that you've done. Go up to
animation and save animation preset with
those animator selected. Call this wow.
So, I've created a folder in presets
which you can't see at the moment. If we
save our FFX file there, then close and
reopen After Effects. We've now got that
folder with the presets that we can
apply to our text.
Over time, as you become more familiar
with text animators, you can gradually
build up a library of presets, which
will potentially save you time on future
projects. We actually don't want these,
although we'll use one or two. So, I'm
going to go to animation, remove all
text animators, and I'm just going to
bring in the video reference for this.
So, if you haven't seen it, this is
Matthew Modin in Formal Jacket, Vietnam
film that Stanley Cubrick shot in East
London. My god, how boring. So, this
time the text is going to go over to the
left. So, I'll draw a mask path and add
the type to that as before. And then
make sure it's right justified. So,
let's add a position animator to that.
And as before, call this push out. And
I'm going to set this to minus 600.
ramp down
and just key frame this from
- 100 over
25 frames.
Let me turn off the audio and just
adjust the ease value on that.
So, I'm going to copy and paste the type
on from our wow text
and just shift these key frames so
they're both
aligned. I find it's easier wherever
possible to have multiple key frames
aligned on the same frame rather than
randomly spread around, but then I'm
massively any retentive. Next, we're
going to add
scale.
So, this one's going to be round.
Set the scale to be 400.
minus 50 on the high, 50 on the E low,
and then
key frame it from zero to
35 frames.
So to have the letters animate off,
going to duplicate the push out
animator, rename this off
and then change this to
1,000.
Just going to shift these key frames.
So the last one's at 35. So 10 to 35.
And just so they animate off completely
I add
a another property scale
that to zero. So to give some randomness
to these letters and kind of sell the
whole frustration shouting thing going
to add a wiggly selector to this. So,
I'm going to have that affect the
rotation and also
scale. And so, let's set that to 200
and
the rotation to let's say 70. Then over
here, we're going to add a wiggly
selector.
Delete the range selector.
So we now got this randomness on the
letters and we can bump up the wiggles
per second and maybe
key frame these min and max amount so
sort of gets
crazier as he screams
and maybe even add a
position to that.
Let's maybe key frame this value
off so as the as the letters go off
they're uh they're more aligned. So set
that push that over here and then just
set that to be zero.
So I might just adjust the type on
Yeah. Okay, that looks okay. Now we can
place those text animations into our
scene along with the footage clips. How
you want to organize things is up to
you. You could have all your layers in
your main scene or pre-ompose some
elements such as this woman and the wow
text. If we take a peek at my project
file for this transition, I thought it'd
be fun to rotate the clips around this
shape layer. There's a lot going on, so
it was easier to pre-MP this because the
type is all procedural. To make our
animation loop, we can simply duplicate
all these layers and type what we want
for the other stage of the animation.
Delete what we don't need and make
adjustments as necessary. Learning how
to spell helps. Then to loop the
animation seamlessly, what we can do is
pick a point in the timeline. Doesn't
matter where, but it's easier if all the
text is in place and legible. Then I'll
mark this first group of assets with the
asterisk key and then duplicate them
and then move them across
and just get a transition here that I'm
happy with where the text is sort of
overlapping a bit as one set goes out
and the other set goes in. And then
we've got our loop points which are mark
with timeline markers.
So, we can just
make sure that it loops. Then,
obviously, when we add footage and shape
layers, just make sure that they loop in
the same way. I added a couple more
tweaked text animations to these clips.
One thing you should know before
finishing your animation is I didn't
really have a plan for mine. I had the
basic idea of animating this text into
this and having film clips which
underscored both scenes, which now that
I look at them in this context, I
realize are mostly from the 80s. What
can I say? It's my era. This was an
unpaid personal project just for fun. If
you're creating anything for commercial
work, you'll obviously need permission
for anything you use. Alternatively, you
can use films which are in the public
domain. There are films which are out of
copyright for various reasons. Some are
old and haven't been renewed. Others had
copyright errors which meant they
immediately entered the public domain.
Which one are you? I'll spare you a long
nerdy detour on copyright laws in
different countries. You'll find some
useful links for this in the description
below if you want to look into this
more. You can download some from the
library of congress for example. I'll
just say that this list contains films
by cubric hitchco
pecking and John Houston. Otherwise I
talk more about public domain assets
generally in this video on my channel.
In it you'll find a collection of
resources for free graphic and video
assets. The sort of stuff which would be
perfect for collage style animation like
this. Next we'll look at how to bring
this all together. Adding shape layers
and random animated elements.
Transitioning between footage clips.
time remapping the animation and
creating an audio track using a mix of
clips and stock effects. There's way too
much going on to do a step by step, but
if you want a deeper dive into any
particular technique, you can view the
whole process for this animation at my
sister channel, the Video Shop Long
Play. This is where I upload unedited
workflows for most of my animations.
This one took over 20 hours. You can see
where I've tried things out and how the
design evolved. I don't present this as
an ideal workflow. Far from it. It's
just my hacky way of working. One of my
weird idiosyncrasies is that I design in
After Effects, if you can even call it
design. I find I can quickly iterate
that way. The shapes were influenced by
one's work. I used them to fill out the
scene and cover the crop in on the
footage clips. I used mesh warp to help
a couple fit the shapes I had in mind.
These are all simple geometric shapes
with grid and fractal noise effects on
top. Animated wave warp for this one.
And drawn elements. Again, you're
probably sick of hearing me say this,
but just play around and have fun. throw
textures and patterns onto shapes until
you get something you're happy with. To
have these footage clips transition like
this, I couldn't think of a way to do it
with effects. There might be, maybe one
of you can let me know. What I did was
create a pre-MP at HD size to drop the
footage in. Then have 10 instances
masked off and stack it in time,
animating in from the right and off to
the left. Then bring that and another
clip I want to loop into a new
composition. And make sure to check
continuous rasterization. So finally,
when you bring that comp into your scene
again with continuous rasterization
checked, they'll animate on and off like
this. You can then easily duplicate
those comps and use them for the other
transitions. For example, these clips.
This is what happens if you don't have
continuous rasterization checked. Next,
I threw what I can only describe as
random nonsense into the mix, mostly to
add little touches to the footage clips.
Some were animated shape layers,
repeaters on path shapes and ellipses.
Others were scribbles which you can
animate in different ways. One method I
used was using motion sketch and drawing
a null randomly around the screen. Then
copying the position path of that null
onto a mask path of a solid, then adding
the stroke effect. Then I used this
expression on the mask path to wiggle
it. I wasn't happy with that effect, so
instead I used the scribble effect. I
did a few variations and comb them
together. When you're animating
something, you always consider where and
how it will be seen. For example, if you
have text, will it be viewed on a phone
or in a stadium with or without a voice
over? I designed this to be a looping
animation, so hopefully viewed a few
times. So, it's deliberate that it may
take a couple of viewings to properly
take in all the type and the other
elements. The idea was to throw in
little details and touches which reward
repeat views. You can judge whether or
not I achieved that. Stop it. Stop it,
please. I beg you. I really can't
emphasize enough if this inspires you to
create your own collage style animation
and I really hope it does. Don't treat
this as a blueprint. Your animation
could use stills instead of footage and
you could really swap out any of these
elements for anything that feels right
to you. Unlike say rewiring a house,
there is no right or wrong approach. As
I always tell students, the fun is
throwing stuff in and seeing what
sticks. Try not to overthink things. All
you should be thinking is, am I having
fun? And if it's a personal project,
presumably like me, you've chosen a
theme that you're interested in or
passionate about. Colage style animation
can be forgiven for non-fluid frame
rates and even mixing frame rates. So
when I wanted to fine-tune the timing of
the animation overall to make it easier,
I time remap the whole thing. I extended
the duration by about a second and
adjusted the graph curve so it slowed
down slightly on the main scenes. If you
want a deeper dive into time remapping,
I explore it more in this video on my
channel. It's a great workflow hack I
use a lot and can be a real time saver.
No pun intended. Then in the same comp,
I added an animated paper overlay on top
set to multiply at 50% opacity and some
grain on both the background solid and
then at 50% opacity on top of the whole
thing. The sound design was really fun
as well. And I approached it in the same
way as the animation, which is to say
half-hazardly with no plan.
I pulled together some audio clips.
These ones for positive. Wow, where'd
you get this? That's maybe the greatest
line reading ever. This from dodgeball.
That's rad. This is glorious. There's
footage online of Henry Thomas
auditioning for tea. Then at the end,
Steven Spielberg says, "Okay, kid, you
got the job."
And these for negative
idiot.
This sound effect from Motion Array.
And this clip from Meantime, which is a
Mike Le film. Where is this meant to be
anyway? Honestly, if all I achieve with
this video is to introduce you to films
of Mike Lee, I'll be happy. I mean, Joey
might not. Oh, you've sort of wasted
everyone's time really, haven't you? A
site you might find useful if you want
specific audio clips from films and
television is Play Phrase Me. It won't
give you anything back for motion
design. But you're a great teacher. I
wanted the sound design to be almost a
collage in the same way as the visuals
and obviously reflect the film nerd
aspect of the project. And this is the
end result.
Okay, kid. You got a job. The
idiot. The business meant to be anyway.
That's right. KJ got a job. The
KJ got a job. I hope you found this
useful. If you have any questions, pop
them in the comments below and I'll do
my best to answer them. Do check out
schoolof.com for courses and resources
that will prepare you for industry
standard practices within the motion
design world. Last but not least, do
remember to subscribe to School of
Motion and my own personal video
channels for more tutorials and tips
like this. Thanks for watching. See you
again soon.
[Music]